7 Reasons You're Not Living Up To Your Potential
Saturday, July 17, 2021
10:27 PM
 
The following list was cobbled together from various sources. All descriptions have been rewritten to include my signature snark.
 
1.	You were raised in an unhealthy environment. 
Whether you want to admit it or not, the people who raised you molded you. Their values and their beliefs were impressed upon you. You had no choice as a child, but as an adult, you do. You have the power to choose your environment and set the tone for your life.
 
2.	You have developed low self-esteem. 
Low self-esteem is a type of negative self-image that you have developed over a long period of time. You believe that you are inadequate because that's what you have been told. Take charge of your life by reminding yourself daily that you are capable, you are powerful, and you deserve to have good things happen in your life. Never allow your dreams to become limited by what you think is possible. Anything is possible.
 
3.	You are deeply influenced by popular media. 
Popular media influences your life in both subtle and overt ways. This is problematic because the effect is largely subconscious. This is, in effect, removing your ability to choose and thus to direct the course of your life. One of the principal effects of media on the psyche is to arouse desire within you. This desire is not your own thus it makes you want to be someone you are not. The solution is simple: Kill your TV.
 
4.	You are surrounded by enablers. 
If your friends and/or family aren't helping you move forward, they are holding you back. The quality of your friends will play a large role in dictating your future. Your habits & decisions are greatly influenced by the company your keep. Endeavor to ingratiate yourself with people who hold higher standards for themselves and others.
 
5.	You are easily distracted.
How much time do you spend watching TV or scrolling aimlessly through social media? Are your hobbies compelling you to accomplish your goals or are they just a distraction? Make a change. While you do need to take breaks and have down-time in order to stay emotionally healthy, you can do so with hobbies that challenge the mind and/or help you to develop a practical skill. For example: woodworking, sewing, computer programming, puzzles, shibari, or charizarding. 
 
6.	You make poor choices. 
You are where you are today because of the choices you have made. Your choices are direct reflections of your values. For example, placing a higher value on instant gratification usually leads to worse outcomes than placing a higher value on delayed gratification. Take time to reflect on the choices you've made recently and consider what those choices say about the values you hold. If you don't want to hold a particular value, consider what value you would like to replace it with and how holding that new value would have impacted the choices you made. Align your choices with the values you want to hold.
 
7.	You feel lost as if your life has no purpose or direction. 
In order to stay on track in life, we need values/beliefs that matter to us and add meaning to our lives. In the previous item, we looked at how values inform our daily decisions. But values can also inspire us to set higher goals and accomplish more in life. Think about what values you hold that also challenge you to be a better person. Focus on how you might go about accomplishing that goal, make a plan, and start executing on the plan immediately.
