A New Model of Human Relationship Categorization
Sunday, July 6, 2025
12:34 AM
 
or… The Friend Zone Reclaimed!
 
Instead of whatever model you use now to sort your interpersonal relationships, for the next 15 minutes consider the following:
 
       "ZONES"
|---------------------|
| Nuclear Family      | 
|---------------------|
|       Family        |     Hierarchy
|---------------------|         of
|      Friends        |        Good
|---------------------|----------------------
|     Dangerous       |   The Bad Place
|---------------------|
 
 
Everyone in the world resides in your friend zone, by default. This informs the way you regard and interact with strangers. That doesn't mean that you default to an overly informal or inappropriately familiar manner like you might with the people you currently label as "friends". Instead, being a friend means that you regard them with respect and decency. 
 
Think about how you act around your drinking buddies or gal pals. Now compare that to how you do - or, if you're an only child, how you imagine you would - interact with siblings. Is there really a difference?” You likely can't identify any because those people are your 𝗰𝗵𝗼𝘀𝗲𝗻 𝗳𝗮𝗺𝗶𝗹𝘆. 
 
That bond may be even more sacred than the mere luck of the draw regarding whose vagina your soul was squeezed through. Likewise, while people you are related to get a head start due to familiarity, that's all they get. How they treat you - especially in your formative years - will go a long way toward determining which zone they belong in. There's no restriction here. Your mother can wind up in the Dangerous zone… 𝘮𝘪𝘯𝘦 𝘥𝘪𝘥.
 
But what of intimate partners? This one takes a bit more mind bending for most people to get the hang of these days because nearly everyone has adopted a toxic mental model of intimate relationships. Without belaboring how that all came about, let's just focus on changing it. 
 
Imagine dating for the purpose of finding your "𝘀𝗼𝘂𝗹𝗺𝗮𝘁𝗲". That's an awful word and I only use it for the image it evokes. But be aware that for any given person there are 𝘮𝘪𝘭𝘭𝘪𝘰𝘯𝘴 of other people who can potentially fill that role. Some may be a natural fit… but even those come in a myriad of styles. 
 
Some may be close but require some effort to become what you need. But with clear communication of needs and expectations along with a 𝘨𝘦𝘯𝘶𝘪𝘯𝘦 𝘥𝘦𝘴𝘪𝘳𝘦 to make the necessary changes on the part of the other person, they may be added to the number. 
 
So, 𝘪𝘯 𝘢 𝘩𝘦𝘢𝘭𝘵𝘩𝘺 𝘴𝘰𝘤𝘪𝘦𝘵𝘺, no one should have any difficulty finding a suitable life partner… and if you want to have two, then have two. Whatever terms you all agree to is fine. Want to be swingers? Be swingers. 
 
While this model has a solid 𝘦𝘵𝘩𝘪𝘤𝘢𝘭 foundation, it is explicitly not a 𝘮𝘰𝘳𝘢𝘭 model. The only bit of moralizing you'll get from me is to 𝘱𝘭𝘦𝘢𝘴𝘦 𝘳𝘦𝘴𝘱𝘦𝘤𝘵 𝘰𝘯𝘦 𝘢𝘯𝘰𝘵𝘩𝘦𝘳 𝘦𝘯𝘰𝘶𝘨𝘩 𝘵𝘰 𝘣𝘦 𝘩𝘰𝘯𝘦𝘴𝘵 𝘢𝘣𝘰𝘶𝘵 𝘵𝘩𝘦 𝘵𝘩𝘪𝘯𝘨𝘴 𝘵𝘩𝘢𝘵 𝘮𝘢𝘵𝘵𝘦𝘳. When it comes to sex, please respect…
 
𝙏𝙝𝙚 𝙁𝙤𝙪𝙧 𝙃𝙤𝙡𝙮 𝘽𝙤𝙪𝙣𝙙𝙖𝙧𝙞𝙚𝙨: 𝐌𝑖𝘯𝘰𝗿𝘴, Ảᶇỉᶆảᶅś, 𝒮𝒽𝒾𝓉, and 𝕿𝔥𝖊 𝕯𝔢𝖆𝔡. 
 
But within those very sensible bounds, if a partner proposes something that gives you pause, look beyond the thing itself, examine their motivations, and use that as the informed basis for your reply. A "𝐜𝕣𝓪𝕫𝙮" thing done for the right reasons can have a miraculous effect!
 
So, in this model, the purpose of the Nuclear Family zone is to populate it with one or more intimate partners. Whether that means locked-down monogamy, child rearing, a polycule, or a partner-in-crime, it makes little difference. Thus, 𝗱𝗮𝘁𝗶𝗻𝗴 𝗶𝘀 𝘁𝗵𝗲 𝗽𝗿𝗼𝗰𝗲𝘀𝘀 𝗼𝗳 𝗴𝗶𝘃𝗶𝗻𝗴 𝗮 𝗽𝗲𝗿𝘀𝗼𝗻 𝗮 𝗰𝗵𝗮𝗻𝗰𝗲 𝘁𝗼 𝗮𝘂𝗱𝗶𝘁𝗶𝗼𝗻 𝗳𝗼𝗿 𝘁𝗵𝗲 (𝗼𝗿 '𝗮') 𝘀𝗽𝗼𝘁 𝗶𝗻 𝘁𝗵𝗲 𝗡𝘂𝗰𝗹𝗲𝗮𝗿 𝗙𝗮𝗺𝗶𝗹𝘆 𝘇𝗼𝗻𝗲.
 
It stands to reason that any successful candidate for a Nuclear Family role must also meet the criteria to be included in the Family zone. Anyone in the Family zone must meet the criteria to be included in the Friend zone. 
 
Now that we are properly oriented, it stands to reason that we should promote people consciously through the 𝗛𝗶𝗲𝗿𝗮𝗿𝗰𝗵𝘆 𝗼𝗳 𝗚𝗼𝗼𝗱 as is appropriate in accordance with your expressions of mutual respect, desire to care for one another, and values alignment. 
 
Going in reverse: Everyone starts in the Friend zone by default. Each individual selects a very elite subset from the Friend zone to be promoted to the Family zone. Then each individual will choose one or more people for promotion to the Nuclear Family zone. This last promotion is special due to the inherent sanctity it embodies and extreme level of 𝘵𝘳𝘶𝘴𝘵 that is both 𝘰𝘧𝘧𝘦𝘳𝘦𝘥 and 𝘳𝘦𝘲𝘶𝘪𝘳𝘦𝘥. As such, any person who is both eligible and desirous of being in the Nuclear Family zone must complete a trial period during which their membership is only 𝘱𝘳𝘰𝘷𝘪𝘴𝘪𝘰𝘯𝘢𝘭. This what we today profane as "𝗱𝗮𝘁𝗶𝗻𝗴".
 
Note also that any promotions must also be done with the full knowledge and consent of the person being promoted. This is because increased intimacy is coupled with increased expectations which require increased personal commitment on both people's parts. Considering that your resources are finite, 𝔠𝔥𝔬𝔬𝔰𝔢 𝔶𝔢 𝔴𝔢𝔩𝔩. The provisional period gives you the necessary opportunity to "try before you buy". 
 
By going about things in this way, you are dating with 𝘪𝘯𝘵𝘦𝘯𝘵𝘪𝘰𝘯 and 𝘱𝘶𝘳𝘱𝘰𝘴𝘦 according to a well-reasoned methodology. And if you want to bang that slut (of whichever gender) you met in the bar, knock yourself out. I'm not your mommy. Just consider that relationship to be ephemeral and don't allow it to distract you from engaging in legitimate partner-finding work. And for your sake, her sake, and all of your future partner's sake, wear a damn condom, man!
 
So this leaves us with just the one zone that has been completely neglected until now: The Dangerous zone. First of all, just like promotion into the Family zone, members of this zone must be individually selected for inclusion. That means that if you happen to be a Democrat, you can't just toss every Republican in here even if sometimes you 𝙧𝙚𝙖𝙡𝙡𝙮 want to! 
 
The people in this zone have demonstrated that they mean you harm, personally (not just indirectly through policy decisions or some such). It's totally valid when adopting this model for the first time to prepopulate this zone from your social media block lists. Note, this is 𝙣𝙤𝙩 a hit list. This a "no contact" list. The people in this zone need not be objectively "bad" people. They are simply people who are bad 𝘧𝘰𝘳 𝘺𝘰𝘶, usually due to radical values misalignment. 
 
And that's all folks. Enjoy your new 8 billion member friend lists!
 
-------------------------------------- Q & A --------------------------------------
 
Q: [Ambiguity] Some people straddle multiple zones at once (e.g. ex-lovers who remain close; toxic family you don't go No Contact with yet). Is this model missing a “liminal” or “transitioning” state between zones?
 
A: No. Just because you have a bad idea doesn't mean that it deserves a place in the model. The very fact that you can't cleanly map a state to the model should tell you everything you need to know!
 
Q: [Cultural flexibility] Not all cultures regard "friendship" as a valid public baseline. In Japan, for instance, the default is social distance, not inclusion. Your model assumes a Western relational style. How could this be expanded to resonate with non-Western cultures?
 
A1: Walk prior to running.
A2: This model is an ideal, not a reflection of what is.
A3: The model includes flexibility for interpreting what a friend means. The thing it doesn't mean is: "person I regard with suspicion by default until they prove to me that my fears are unfounded." Any definition of 'friend' on the right side of that gets a pass.
 
 
----------------------------- FURTHER READING -----------------------------
 
𝗖𝗼𝗿𝗲 𝗣𝗵𝗶𝗹𝗼𝘀𝗼𝗽𝗵𝗶𝗰𝗮𝗹 𝗙𝗼𝘂𝗻𝗱𝗮𝘁𝗶𝗼𝗻𝘀
 1. Martin Buber – I and Thou 
Explores authentic vs. transactional human relationships. Foundational for understanding default respect as a moral imperative.
 2. Aristotle – Nicomachean Ethics (Books VIII–IX) 
Breaks down the three types of friendship: utility, pleasure, and virtue. Essential for understanding relationship classification through values.
 3. Confucius – The Analects (esp. 1, 4, 12) 
On ritual, roles, and respect as the basis for societal harmony - parallels the implicit concept of “zones as ethical containers.”
 4. David G. Schnarch – Passionate Marriage 
Applies systems theory and differentiation to intimacy. A grown-up view of trust, selfhood, and eroticism.
 
𝗔𝗽𝗽𝗹𝗶𝗲𝗱 𝗣𝘀𝘆𝗰𝗵𝗼𝗹𝗼𝗴𝘆 & 𝗥𝗲𝗹𝗮𝘁𝗶𝗼𝗻𝗮𝗹 𝗠𝗼𝗱𝗲𝗹𝘀
 1. Esther Perel – Mating in Captivity 
Challenges traditional romantic scripts. Explores eroticism, emotional honesty, and sexual autonomy inside commitment.
 2. Eric Berne – Games People Play 
Introduces transactional analysis: the roles we unconsciously assume in relationships. Great for spotting "dangerous zone" behaviors.
 3. Marshall Rosenberg – Nonviolent Communication 
On aligning needs and requests without coercion. Useful for mutual promotion through the zones with respect and clarity.
 
𝗠𝗼𝗱𝗲𝗿𝗻 𝗖𝘂𝗹𝘁𝘂𝗿𝗮𝗹 & 𝗘𝘁𝗵𝗶𝗰𝗮𝗹 𝗖𝗿𝗶𝘁𝗶𝗾𝘂𝗲
 1. Bell Hooks – All About Love 
Reclaims love as a radical political and ethical act. Affirms the central thesis that love and respect are not earned but extended as a baseline.
 2. Frithjof Bergmann – New Work, New Culture 
Though focused on labor, it's essential reading for designing value-based, intentional systems - including for relationships.
 3. Nozick – The Examined Life (esp. “Love’s Bond”) 
Defines love as union while preserving individual integrity. Philosophically adjacent to the “Nuclear Family” promotion criteria.
 
𝗕𝗼𝘂𝗻𝗱𝗮𝗿𝗶𝗲𝘀 & 𝗦𝗵𝗮𝗱𝗼𝘄 𝗪𝗼𝗿𝗸
 1. Nedra Glover Tawwab – Set Boundaries, Find Peace 
Modern, practical guide on how to enforce and respect boundaries. Applies directly to managing the “Dangerous” zone.
 2. Pia Mellody – Facing Codependence 
On how trauma distorts relational boundaries. Vital for understanding who gets "demoted" to the danger zone and why.
