Achieving Clarity In Gender Studies 
Friday, August 23, 2024
6:30 AM
 
"Pessimism may be the rational conclusion, but it seldom produces the desired results. Optimism is the catalyst for manifestation."
--Severin Aequus
 
...or that's the theory anyway. But I wonder at what point we men are deluding ourselves. Sure, let's assume that optimism gets us all girlfriends. Yay! But I can tell you from experience that having a girlfriend is not necessarily better than not having one.
 
In all probability, the majority of those girls are just there for what they can take. Why? Because society is sick to the core. You can trace it all back to capitalism. Ancient wisdom tells us that the seed of suffering lies in the belief that we are separate from one another. Capitalism is the very embodiment of that belief. Thus, capitalism is the root cause of suffering. Many people say money is, but money is just the way that capitalism inflicts itself upon people. So rather than being evil itself, it is more like the vehicle of evil.
 
As men, we suffered under this tyranny for generations and learned to shoulder its hardships. We also insulated women from having to be exposed to it. But then a small minority rose up, beating a righteous drum of oppression and disregarded the value that men were providing because, ironically, our protection fueled their ignorance of the danger. So, they concluded that was no danger at all!
 
So now they stand naked in the cold without the ability to light a fire, so they relate to men like stray cats, stealing food from windowsills and drinking from leaky hoses (really thin double-entendre right there). Meanwhile, if they could just manage to trust us and act civilly, we would welcome them in from the harsh weather into the warmth of our homes where they would be happy and comfortable. But fear, fueled by real or imagined dangers posed by a minority of men, prevents them from coming inside.
 
It's a depressing and absurd state of affairs.
 
However, as much as we may enjoy having a kitty around the house, we don't require one. The kitties, on the other hand, depend on us for their survival in one way or another. 
 
--------------------
 
The people who do not grasp this subject will shout "misogyny!" when nothing could be further from the truth. The truth is that there does exist a natural order of things that is favored by the overwhelming majority of men and women. 
 
That order has been thrown out of whack and we need to restore it. That doesn't mean turning back the clock to 1950. We couldn't do that even if we wanted to. The genie is out of the bottle. But we do have to define a model where traditional gender roles are enforced, but just make them so that they aren't strictly assigned by unrelated biological characteristics. 
 
In essence, what we need is a mash-up of the 1950s with gender-fluidity. 
From this point on, everyone is gender fluid. 
 
If your choice is to identify with the gender that corresponds to your biological configuration for the rest of your life, then you do that. If you want to align your gender with the phases of the moon and become non-gendered during leap years, more power to ya. But whatever you choose, you've got a job to do and a part to play.
