Addiction
Saturday, August 31, 2024
10:32 AM
 
A Comprehensive Review of Modern Life
 
"Reality is just a crutch for people who can't cope with drugs."
-- Robin Williams
 
Our lives are almost entirely governed by routine behaviors. Routine makes most people happy because it's predictable, which creates an illusion of control that makes people feels safe. The routines that some people like to arbitrarily call "addictions" are really just random behaviors that some people chose to demonize for political reasons. In truth, there is no correlation at all between unproductive behaviors and illegality. This is trivial to prove which makes one wonder why the idea and the stigma persist.
 
There are only three types of behaviors that govern human life:
 
1.	Transient behaviors - Arbitrary one-off behaviors that do not repeat
2.	Productive routines - Repeated behaviors which further one's goals
3.	Unproductive routines - Repeated behaviors that do not further one's goals or even impede them.
 
Transient behaviors can be in response to an unexpected event or emergency or illness, or they can be expected, like an annual vacation, etc. In any case, they are of no interest to the current examination. For example, if you have a routine of traveling to the desert every year and taking hallucinogens for a week, that is not an unproductive routine because the time period is too long. Routines, for the purpose of this examination are behaviors that repeat on at least a daily basis. 
 
Note: For the purpose of the present essay, routines are behaviors that repeat on a daily basis or even more frequently.
 
Productive routines include all of the body maintenance tasks, like sleeping, eating, showering, etc. These behaviors consume 1/2 of your time. Pause here for a moment. One half of your life is spent just maintaining your meat suit. You only get a choice with what to do with half of your time on this planet. 
 
Most of the time, working is a productive routine. So if you work for 8 hours per day, 5 days per week, that only leaves 4 hours of discretionary time each day during the work week and 12 hours per day on weekends. So, the average person has 44 hours, or slightly less than 2 days, of discretionary time per week! 
 
Focusing in now on those 44 hours, how do we determine which behaviors are productive and which are unproductive? The answer to that question hinges on the assumption that a person has goals. If you have no goals, then nothing you do is either productive or unproductive. You're just filling time with arbitrary behaviors, so it doesn't matter what you do. 
 
There are some who consider this to be a state of enlightenment because they are now free to act in any way they wish. One could counter that it isn't because without a sense of purpose their life is empty. Alternatively, one could say that they are wasting their life by not doing anything to improve the conditions of the world or to otherwise leave a legacy after they die. These are, however, easily countered by any number of nihilistic arguments, such as reminding that one day the sun will become a red giant and consume the Earth. When that happens, nothing we have done will matter, therefore life is meaningless, so do whatever. 
 
I cannot answer this question for you. It is up to each individual to decide for themselves if they see value in having personal goals or not. The remainder of this essay assumes that you do see value in goals and have decided on one or more of them for yourself.
 
Unproductive routines are thus any repeated pattern of behavior that does not serve to advance one's personal goals. That could be playing video games, having sex, watching TV, smoking crack, or collecting commemorative stamps. But wait, none of those are intrinsically "bad". Even stamp collecting is not necessarily the horrible activity it is portrayed to be in the media! 
 
Notice now how the discussion naturally wants to turn from objective language like unproductive to subjective emotional language like bad. This is how people manipulate others. Don't let yourself be manipulated. Keep the discussion objective! 
 
In the same way that drinking too much water can kill you, too much time spent on any of these activities will have a deleterious effect on your ability to accomplish your goals. The most basic way to measure this effect is through opportunity cost. That is to say that any time spent doing something that doesn't advance your goals is time you could have spent doing something that does. 
 
Moreover, there can be follow-on effects of some unproductive behaviors. Watching TV, for example, can leave one distressed about the state of the world or other matters one has no ability to alter. That is a pointless waste and an example of borrowing problems. 
 
Other behaviors are complicated and costly to perform, such as having sex. If you have a personal goal of having children as a means to create a legacy, then this activity falls in the productive category for you… but only to the extent required to procreate. Any sexual activity beyond that is purely for pleasure, so stay right here. Obviously, if you don't desire to procreate, then the benefit of sex is at best unclear. 
 
Before jumping into why sex may or may not have health benefits, let's consider all of the other things that accompany it. If you're a man, there is an immediate financial cost associated with it. Whether you're paying for it directly or indirectly, there is a financial cost. While there may exist a few broke playboys who can skirt this rule, they are a tiny percentage of the male population. 
 
Note: Numbers in curly braces {} refer to footnotes.
 
The next cost incurred by everyone is time. Time spent locating a potential partner can consume a tremendous amount of one's discretionary time. Time spent planning, preparing for, and attending dates. Time spent sharing about oneself and learning about the other person, etc. The state of not being in a relationship and being in the early stages of a relationship are the most costly in terms of time [50% of the US population is currently single{1}]. There is only one way to reclaim all of this time: stop indulging in this activity [50% of single adults choose this option]. Barring that, the best way to recoup a large portion of that time is to get into a long-term relationship (LTR) [only 14% of single adults are actively pursuing this option].
 
Note: When I make generalizations about men and women, note that it doesn't mean that you specifically are like this, but a great many of your peers are. So instead of being offended, rejoice that you have a leg up on your competition! (…and it most certainly doesn't mean that I hate anyone. I want everyone to be awesome and am saddened when I learn that people are failing to be their best possible selves. But at the same time, I'm not going to bury my head in the sand and pretend like people aren't the way they are.)
 
---Side Quest---
 
If there is such inherent value to being in a LTR, why is it so difficult to find these days? 
 
The reasons vary. But if we exclude the people for whom an LTR is just not a feasible option, we have a state where women are far more selective than they have been in the past. If anything, men have become more flexible in terms of their requirements, so women end up doing most of the rejecting. One reason for this is that men value their time more and recognize that time spent dating is wasted if it doesn't result in a LTR. Whereas women don't experience the same kind of pressure if they're not looking to have children. This is because a romantic relationship is often a goal in women's lives, so even the courting process is a directly productive behavior toward that end. In contrast, men are more likely to view dating as an unavoidable cost to produce the desired result. 
 
This fact makes it wildly ironic that men are the ones who are expected to plan dates and pay for them when it's generally the last thing they want to be doing and often results in nothing of benefit for the man. Of course, this practice is just another holdover from a different time when everything was completely different. For some reason, we seem to hold on to some customs and not others. I wonder if one were to examine exactly which old customs we still practice and which ones we don't if a glaringly-obvious pattern would emerge… probably not. I'm sure it's entirely random. 
 
Another factor that is common to both genders is believing that you'll be young forever. You've always been young, right? So it's natural to identify with that. One may intellectually know and accept that they will get old, but it doesn't seem truly real until it happens. Regardless of the fact that age impacts women's dating prospects far more significantly than it does men's, we all still behave is if we'll be young forever… right up until we aren't. This results in a situation where women who don't want to have children, or don't want to have any more, feel as if they have all the time in the world to find the perfect partner. 
 
Worse yet, they often do! Unfortunately, that handsome millionaire playboy just happens to be dating 27 other women at the moment. Informal internet-based polls{2} have shown that women will more often choose to be number 28 in that man's stable under the vain notion that they will be the one who softens his heart rather than spend their life with a normal guy who will be faithful to them and treat them well. This is only exacerbated by the playboy's relatively lax standards since from his perspective, she's just Ms. Right Now, so he'll accept women that he wouldn't ever consider to be in a LTR with, should he ever decide to pursue such a thing. This leaves women with a skewed sense of their own attractiveness because they figure if Mr. Playboy will sleep with me then that must be the target market I can expect to attract and I won't settle for less. This view is clearly misguided and incredibly destructive to society.
 
---Back To Regularly-Scheduled Programming--- 
 
The point being that all of these costs must be considered when determining if the behavior is productive or unproductive. To use more popular phrasing, "Is the juice worth the squeeze?" The answer to this is highly personal since the impact to one's ability to accomplish their goals can vary dramatically based on whatever benefits having a partner provides them. Naturally, having the wrong partner can even be a detriment. So it is critical to find the right partner, but your criteria must be limited to only those things that directly contribute to making you more productive. For example, while insisting that a partner have a comparable sex drive might meet that requirement, it's unlikely that insisting that they have large breasts does.
 
I know that was a lot of time spent on just one example of discretionary activity from a list, but it is something deeply-rooted in our beings, so I felt it was worth a closer examination. 
 
If you got sidetracked with my sidetracking, the points made so far are:
 
1.	Discretionary behaviors are things we may choose to do. In other words, they are not related to maintaining one's monkey suit (for most people, one's job is essential to ongoing suit maintenance). These behaviors may be productive or unproductive.
2.	When determining whether a discretionary behavior is productive or not, we must consider not only whether or not it contributes to the accomplishment of our goals but also how much time we spend doing it. In other words, too much of a good thing can turn into a bad thing.
3.	Some discretionary behaviors that are productive are encumbered with upfront or downstream costs that must also be considered according to a cost:benefit analysis.
 
The one remaining category of behavior that we haven't directly touched on is recreation. Recreation is a productive behavior inasmuch as it improves mental health which in turn improves focus and imbues a general sense of well-being which promotes productivity. But that assumes that time is allotted for the directly productive activities. So now we have:
 
4.	Directly productive behaviors are those that contribute directly to accomplishing one's goals. One's occupation may or may not qualify here, but it is still productive in the sense that is required for basic maintenance of one's physical body.
5.	Indirectly productive behaviors improve one's ability to perform directly productive activities. Examples include: non-procreative sex, exercise, meditation, and telling dad jokes. 
 
At this point, we have a set of productive behaviors that directly contribute to the accomplishment of our personal goals, indirect behaviors that support those, and unproductive behaviors that don't meet either of those definitions. At this point, it should be clear not only why everyone is so busy all of the time, but also why there just isn't any time for activities which have no purpose or are self-defeating.
 
But… you're doing them anyway. So what now? First, determine whether the behavior is unproductive due to the nature of that behavior (e.g. texting your ex-girlfriend at 3:00am) or because of how much time you're spending doing it (e.g. "Doomscrolling"). 
 
If any amount of time spent doing the behavior is unproductive, then you should stop doing it, right? Wrong. It is impossible for us to stop doing anything.  To stop doing something implies going into suspended animation, a state we are incapable of going voluntarily. Therefore, since stopping is logically impossible, we must replace that behavior with another one. It may seem like I'm being overly pedantic here, but the distinction is significant.
 
[ As a side note: Imagine being my counselor in a rehab program? 😂 ]
 
Here is where we have to get into the rather pitiful reality of how the human brain works. The brain is a pleasure-seeking organ that also happens to be in a position to decide what your monkey suit does. So, we're all essentially like cars being driven by a drunken lunatic going 100+ MPH to no destination in particular while repeatedly punching ourselves in the nuts and blaming everyone else for making our balls hurt and letting that fuel our ever-increasing road rage.
 
So… if the goal is to stop punching ourselves, then the best way to do that is to find some other activity to occupy that hand. The choice is up to you, but if you want to stick with the new behavior and not revert back to the ball-punching, you need to select something that your brain will register as being more pleasurable. I'm not really sure what you could do with one free hand that would be intensely pleasurable while driving a car like a maniac, but you're smart people, I trust you'll think of something.
 
As for the behaviors that are not staying in their allocated time window, there are many tools that you can use to help with this, including all manner of timers and whatnot. This is also where a partner can be of tremendous value. When in a state of clarity, communicate your intention to them, then give yourself punishments for exceeding the allotted time. Have them withhold something they normally do for you with a duration that gets longer every 30 minutes you go over. But don't make it sex because that punishes them too. If you have to make it that, then make it where you have to give them oral and that's it or something like that. But it's better to have you pick up one of their chores "since you have so much free time". This is just one way that having a partner can be a stabilizing force in your life.
 
Lastly, if all else fails, Uncle Al has some advice for you.
 
That'll be $10,000, please!
 
---Afterword---
 
Many of you probably noted that I made no mention of trauma or mental illness in this essay. That's because it makes things so much less neat and tidy and you know how I like to wrap up a complex issue in a pretty bow. If the unproductive behavior you're struggling with is related to trauma or mental illness, then it's simply out of scope for this essay. If it were simple to address, then I would. But the t ruth is that what steps you need to take are very dependent on exactly what type of trauma or mental disorder is causing it. In some cases, medication may be required and in others there may be no known way to replace the behavior. Therefore, a comprehensive exploration of that subject would be much longer than the present work.
 
---Footnotes---
 
1.	US Dating statistics were sourced from a study published on 8/20/2020 by the Pew Research Center.
 
2.	I'm working from memory on this one. But such studies can only be done very informally because they have to control for the woman's ability to actually be eligible to be in such a man's stable. Naturally, women for whom that isn't an option will always choose the normal guy. So be aware of that limitation and the general subjectivity inherent to such a statement.
