Advice For a 15-Year-Old Boy
Saturday, July 25, 2020
12:08 AM
 
Question: "I’m a 15-year-old boy and haven’t been in a relationship. Everyone around me (my friends and my sister) have boyfriend/girlfriend/etc. Is this going to affect me later in life with relationships skills?" 
 
Severin Aequus: You’re 15. Don’t sweat it. Everything is fine. If you ever forget, refer to the cover of a book called The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy. On it, you’ll find emblazoned in large letters the words “Don’t Panic”. That is probably the best general life advice anyone can ever receive.
 
Keep in mind that sexual and emotional maturity occur at different rates for men and women. This is just one of those little cosmic jokes built into life. As a male, it means that you will become more attractive to women later in life than women experience it. For a man, this starts around 25, peaks around 35, and then you enjoy a long slow burn to about 70. Women on the other hand, experience an intense peak of attractiveness around 20 which burns down rapidly to 30 and then has a gentle tail reaching 40 and then that’s about it. That’s a fine enough deal if a girl can lock a guy down to stay with her into her post-menopausal years. But if not, it kind of just sucks. So you might be tempted to resent women for appearing to have the upper hand in relationship matters due to their “in demand” 20-something status. But remember that they are working with a very short fuse. Also, bear in mind that men literally control everything else in the world, so they gotta have something. Even if that something is kind of a lemon in the end. It really is hard being female. Don’t forget this.
 
As for your relationship skills, there are two main areas you need to focus on: yourself and others. As a man, your attractiveness hinges on your ability to define who you are and what you stand for. You need to figure yourself out and plot a course for your life and commit to that. That kind of “put togetherness” is the kind of thing that will make women swoon.
 
As for the second part, just talk to women like a normal human being. Do it online, in person, whatever, wherever. Bond over a common interest. Just don’t be a creepy weirdo, which is easy if you don’t go into the situation with any expectations. Just be cool and be OK with being in the “friend zone” or whatever. That doesn’t matter. Just get some exposure to what women are like and how they communicate with each other. For example, you’ll find that they tend to respond to emotion moreso than pure rational arguments, as men usually do. And so on. Build a list of these things that set women apart and then use that knowledge to be able to communicate with them more effectively. Essentially, learn to speak their language and you’ll get a whole lot further in relationships.
 
Lastly, when you do decide that the time is right to get out there and start dating, don’t fall prey to schemes for getting women to sleep with you at random. Don’t be a pick-up artist or degrade yourself by engaging in “negging” or other sorts of devious means to manipulate women. Not only is that unethical and dishonest, it’s also totally unnecessary. Whatever you end up wanting to do with a partner or even what you may want to experience with many partners, there are people out there who are down to play your game. So just be honest and be ready for a lot of no’s before you get a yes. But even that can be mitigated by the wonders of technology. Today, you can literally just search for a group of people in your area interested in whatever kinky thing your mind can imagine and it’ll surely be there. But of course, you’ve got 3 more years before any of that will be an issue.
 
And one last thing: Never pay for sex. Both parties are always worse off after such an arrangement. She is further degraded by assigning a dollar amount to her self worth and you are degraded by believing that affection must be purchased. There’s no upside to it, so just steer clear. I don’t care how cute she is.
