Am I ready to start a new relationship?
Saturday, February 5, 2022
9:35 PM
 
You’ll hear a lot of talk about getting “fully” over your ex. But if you were really in love with your ex, the fact is that you will never be “fully” over them. If I had to sit in a room right now with the woman I nearly married 20 years ago, it would not be like sitting in a room with a stranger. There would be feelings erupting to the surface all over the place. Demanding that people “get over” being in love is like asking you to “get over” losing your parents. It’s unreasonable and foolish. 
 
The following is an example of how sensitive people can be about what they perceive as emotional unavailability due to being hung up on one's ex. I dated a woman once who would get upset any time I would mention my ex. She interpreted this as my ex being always on my mind and that I was not over the relationship. I countered by stating that she and I lived together for the previous three years. She had a tremendous impact on my life. There was no way for me to extract her presence from those memories nor was it reasonable to do so. I wasn't mentioning her in some nostalgic way, but the fact of her involvement is a necessary component of the story. After a few rounds of this, I started to suspect that perhaps she was the one who couldn't get over my ex!
 
Since we never fully get over old loves - and arguably never should - then how do we know that relationship isn’t interfering and affecting the next one? Well, here’s another dose of reality for you: It is and it will! There’s a word for it too: learning. We learn from our past relationships and the things we learn change who we are as partners.
 
The better question is: In what ways have your past relationships affected who you are as a partner? Have they made you a better person that others would be happier being in a relationship with or have they made you grow bitter, jaded, and cold? The answer to this one is a bitter pill indeed because the choice is entirely yours to make. It doesn’t matter who you were in a relationship with before or what they did or whose fault it is. None of that matters. It’s your choice how you want to perceive that lesson and how you want to internalize it. Period.
 
Getting back to the original question, are you ready to embark on a new relationship? Perhaps it’s easier to ask a few simpler questions to gauge not whether you are over your ex necessarily, but whether you have room in your heart for someone new:
 
•	Does your heart still ache to be in a relationship with your ex?
•	Can you confidently describe what lessons you are taking away from your last relationship and how they serve to improve the kind of partner you will be in your next relationship?
•	Are you willing to risk being hurt for the chance that this next relationship will add more joy to your life than it may remove?
 
If you answered “no”, “yes”, “yes” then there’s a good chance that you’re ready to move on with a new relationship. Note that dating a new person may feel odd to you at first. Seeing them next to you in bed rather than your ex may seem “wrong” on some level. Don’t let that freak you out. It will pass quickly as you make new memories with this new person.
