Anonymity and Accountability
Saturday, August 24, 2024
10:59 AM
 
Note: Numbers in parentheses () refer to footnotes located at the bottom of this post.
 
I was just pondering whether it's really necessary to put one's full address on their resume. I can see how the city and state may be relevant, but at the resume stage, no one needs your exact address. 
 
Then, I began to harden this argument by contemplating the possible personal safety risks that this practice introduces. For example, what if someone who knows you and doesn't like you sees your resume and now knows where to find you for harassment purposes or worse?
 
Then I remembered that for decades, literally everyone in a city knew the address of everyone else in the city. This directory of addresses and phone numbers was delivered to everyone's doorstep annually by evil people who just wanted to see others be attacked and harassed... aka The Telephone Company.
 
As it turns out, their plan didn't work as well as predicted. They were obligated to provide a means to opt-out of being included in this directory and fewer than 1% of people chose to do that, which strongly suggests that harassment was not much of a concern. 
 
So why is it today?
 
One possibility is that in the pre-internet times, people were only influenced by people they actually knew in real life plus the TV news. Stalkers and incidents of harassment that didn't escalate to violence weren't good candidates for TV news stories. People's friend networks were small and unlikely to include a person who was a harassment victim, thus they were under a false impression of the likelihood of such a thing occurring.
 
Another possibility is that the knowledge that one's information is public drove a subconscious behavior to not unduly upset others by treating people more graciously and with greater compassion leading to fewer incidents of stalking and/or violence.
 
Yet another possibility is that with dramatically decreased access to people outside one's home town, relationships were deeper and more personal. No one cared that their address and phone number were published because everyone who knew them had that information already anyway. So, if there ever was a case of stalking, harassment, or violence, it would be obvious who the perpetrator was. Therefore, the victim knew the perpetrator's address and phone number. But not only that, they likely had the perpetrator's parents contact information as well! 
 
"Joe's stalking you, huh? Tell his mom. It'll stop real quick."
 
Comparing that with today, hiding one's contact information from people you are just meeting is not an effective strategy to prevent unwanted contact. According to every study ever done on the subject, the overwhelming majority of stalking cases involve people who have been in an intimate relationship. Since it would be very impractical to withhold your contact information through an entire relationship, it doesn't matter when you reveal it, so it might as well be as soon as you're asked. To refuse to offer contact information does not increase your safety and only sows seeds of mistrust very early in the relationship often resulting in an aborted attempt before a relationship is even established.
 
At the risk of being redundant, I want to restate this. I've reviewed every major study done on intimate-partner staking, harassment(1), and violence (including homicide) conducted over the last 20 years(2).
 
1.	Breaking it down by gender: Women reported being stalked by men in about 60% of cases, with another 25% being stalked by females and 15% did not know their stalker's gender. Men were fairly evenly divided with about 45% being stalked by females, 40% male and 15% unknown. To date, no study has found a case of anyone being stalked by a transgendered individual.  
2.	That's not really as impressive as it sounds. There has only been about a dozen original research efforts. The whole endeavor took about an hour and a half. 
Fun Fact: Almost all of the statistics cited on this subject are extrapolated from less than 100 cases studied. 
Fun Fact: Every single study I was able to find on Intimate Partner Homicide (IPH) only considered male perpetrators and female victims. I could find no studies of male victims of IPH. This was also noted by a meta-analysis of IPH in their summary of findings. Additionally, every single study of IPH was conducted exclusively by women.
