Apologizing
Thursday, November 30, 2023
5:30 AM
 
Your partner has walked away, either physically or functionally, from a dispute where you feel that they shoulder the primary burden of responsibility for what has gone wrong. At this point, dissolving the relationship is becoming an option seriously worth considering or may have even been openly discussed. So how should one proceed from here?
 
1.	Decide if the thing being lost as a result of this conflict is a thing worth saving. If so…
2.	Consider what actions you have done that *they* would consider a mistake (regardless of whether you consider them to be).
3.	Determine whether those actions could have contributed to the current situation.
4.	Take responsibility for your role in the current situation.
5.	Express this to the other person and apologize for your contributions to the situation... but without letting them off the hook. They still must apologize, but you're leading by example. This is particularly effective if your role is minimal.
6.	If done properly and honestly, they shouldn't bring up anything you haven't considered. But if they do, accept it without argument. This is their reality; your justifications are highly unlikely to alter it.
7.	Either right then or at a later time, repeat steps 3 and 4.
8.	Set a deadline for them to reciprocate, but convey it subtly. For example, "Thank you for accepting my apology. I look forward to hearing your feelings about this at some point in the next few days."
 
If any of the following are true or likely to be true, you must walk away:
 
1.	They don't reciprocate the gesture or do so in a dishonest or placating manner.
2.	They are being dishonest about either your role or theirs in the matter, especially as it pertains to the material facts.
3.	They are unable to remember key events or actions that they took.
4.	The situation involves severe consequences for third parties (e.g. they killed/assaulted/raped someone) and/or an extended jail term is likely.
5.	THEIR actions are in violation of YOUR personal values. (this is why value-alignment is critical for couples).
6.	They did at any point threaten to harm you or your loved ones.
