Being a Landlord is an Investment
2026
Severin Aequus

People with no moral compass see the purchase and subsequent leasing of real estate to be a guaranteed economic win. No matter what happens, they are owed rent every month... at least that's what the law says.

Unfortunately, the law is not the arbiter of morality or justice. Being a landlord carries a huge responsibility. You are control other people's access to a basic human need. And if they fall on hard times and can't pay your rent? You have the legal right to evict them. In many cases, if a miracle doesn't happen or someone else who never benefitted from their tenancy doesn't step up to absorb the loss, eviction is a death sentence. 

Any law that allows a citizen to condemn another to death for an unpaid debt is catastrophically immoral.

If the law said that it was fine to personally execute a tenant who fell behind on their rent, would you do it? No? Why not? Because the illusion of the lack of accountability afforded by the justice system lets you sleep at night. Think really hard about that.

Being a landlord is not about investing in real estate, it is investing in capitalism itself. Just like any other investment, the value may go up or down and it may pay dividends or it may not. That's the gamble. Real estate is not a secret hack to avoid risk.

How is it an investment in capitalism?

Capitalism is predicated on the flawed belief that there will always exist enough jobs paying a livable wage for every person who needs or wants one. This premise is ludicrous, but yet people somehow bought into it anyway. Presumably, at the time that capitalism was being originally implemented, jobs were plentiful and they just couldn't imagine a scenario where they wouldn't be. Unfortunately, we now have to pay for their lack of reasonable foresight.

So, in a market where there are not enough jobs for everyone who needs them, how can a tenant remain liable to pay rent? They cannot. This cost must be borne by the landlord who is the one who made the decision to take the investment risk in the first place.