Choosing Pansexuality
Friday, March 17, 2017
10:20 AM
 
Why are most people so obsessed with the gender of their sexual partners? 
 
I understand that people may have preferences for one thing or the other. But the way most people describe their sexual orientation goes much deeper than a mere preference for one sensation or another. We tend to tie our sexual orientation into our very identity as a person. Why?
 
Why does almost everyone filter out potential mates by genital configuration and other superficial physical attributes instead of first looking for someone they have a lot in common with and enjoy being with and can potentially fall madly in love with? Surely, if you are in love with someone, the two of you can find ways to make physical intimacy work out.
 
If you're a guy, you're probably thinking that there's no other man in the world you could ever fall in love with. That's total bullshit. There are exactly two reasons why you don't fall in love with men regularly: 
 
1.	You have become accustomed to being with women and they are familiar to you. This level of comfort allows you greater enjoyment of women and conversely offers a barrier to intimacy with men.
2.	Societal pressure from friends and family which has only been increased by your constant insistence on being obnoxiously heterosexual.
 
Obviously, people are born with natural affinities for heterosexuality, homosexuality, and everything in between. But if we wanted to, it wouldn't be difficult to lift the restrictions listed above that are holding us in this box and curtailing our chances for finding love and severely limiting the range of our experience of intimacy.
 
 
 
 
[ EDIT: The actual experience of attraction is deeper than just those 2 factors. However those factors prevent the things which lead to attraction. Therefore, it's safe to assume that there aren't millions of men all over the world pining for one another and would be together if it weren't for that pesky social pressure. The causality works the other way around. ]
