Connection vs Hooking Up
Saturday, May 20, 2023
4:21 PM
 
Situation: 
(Note: Overgeneralizing by gender, but for the most part)
Women: Claim to want a deeper connection with others
Men: Just want to fuck
Me: Wants deeper connection with others
 
What does a deeper connection involve?
•	Communication (time, effort)
•	Vulnerability
•	Risk
 
Benefits of a deeper connection:
•	A sense of actually having a partner
•	Being seen/heard
•	Feeling that you matter to someone
 
Q: So if my wants are aligned with what most women want, why then am I alone?
A: Because whole women want connection, they simultaneously fear the vulnerability required.
 
Explanation: In an open play party scenario, I will never hook up with anyone because women in this space are willing to accept superficial encounters because presumably that's all they think they're going to find.
 
Counterpoint: When I announce that I'm looking for a deeper connection, it does not attract women to me. If anything, they run away. Again, this could be a product of fear or just too limited of a sample set.
 
Competition: Every other guy present is going to get his pick before I do for several very simple reasons:
•	All he needs to know is what a woman looks like which he can assess in an instant.
•	Most guys have zero standards, so anyone with a vagina will do.
•	They are content with superficial sexual relations presumably because they are unaware that anything more exists.
 
Result: Even in a scenario where there are fewer men than women, I'm going to lose because the other guys will still occupy all the women's time while I'm trying to find someone I can get to know.
 
But even if there is an abundance of women, there's a problem in the approach:
 
Most men approach women in an overtly sexual way and expect something to come of it in 30 minutes or less. So their words and body language are overtly sexual in nature. Their intentions are clear. This makes a woman feel validated. But even more to the point, women don't know what the differences are between the approaches of men simply wanted sex and men wanting a connection. They think all men approach the same way, so if a guy is even slightly reserved (because he's trying to assess whether you're the kind of person he's attracted to) they instantly perceive this as rejection. So the guys wanting just superficial sexual relationships scoop up all of the women before the guys looking for a connection have an opportunity to make a move.
 
And the next day the women will post on social media about how there are no good men anymore and thousands of men will slam their laptops closed and just give up because the stupidity is just too profound.  
 
I approach with conversation. This is not only unusual, but it doesn't make my intentions readily apparent. So the response is first one of caution as she's trying to sort out what I want, then it puts me in a friend category in her mind because apparently women are that accustomed to male lovers not giving a shit about them. And even if they do get what I'm about and what I'm after, then they may not be willing to invest the time to build that sort of connection. 
 
-- The Connected Relationship --
 
What kind of time commitment is required?
 
A meaningful connection will continually deepen over time. That's the primary reason why such connections are attractive. But in terms of what might be considered the bare minimum to get to a point where connected sex is possible - and assuming the right conversations are had - it's probably around 1-2 hours. That's it.
 
What's happening in that conversation?
 
1.	Building familiarity: This involves ensuring that the two of you are communicating effectively. In this way, we are confirming our ability to relate ideas and concepts with each other. This is important to establish comfort so that you can be confident that your partner understands you when you need to communicate something.
2.	Communicating needs and wants: This allows the other person to be aware of the things you like and don't like and vice versa so that whomever is going to take the lead in sex can begin to construct a storyboard of what form a session of sex would assume.
3.	Relating past relationship experiences: This is necessary to ensure that the vision each of you have for a relationship is something the other is OK with or that the primary elements of your relationship visions can be merged into something attractive to both of you.
 
Note: If the idea of having this conversation with someone you just met today you feel uncomfortable, something is wrong with you. You have deep emotional scars that must heal before you can ever hope to establish a meaningful relationship. 
 
Can't you just be open to either type of sex? Just make yourself receptive to whatever comes your way.
 
If you're asking this question, there's a 99% chance that you're female. As a man, there is no such thing as things "coming your way". As a man, you are societally expected to be the aggressor. This means that you must decide the goal and the approach you want to take to achieve that goal. Intellectually, it seems plausible that a person who longs for deeper connections could choose to pursue a superficial experience. 
 
Not really.
 
Even assuming that the person can handle the experience from an emotional perspective, the issue becomes logistical. Even if we study how to conduct the approach of a man pursuing a superficial relationship, we generally can't actually carry it out because it feels just too stupid and unnatural. not to mention, it feels deceptive which starts to open up a whole slew of other issues.
 
Assuming you can actually follow through without either laughing or becoming entangled in ethical concerns, the sex is awful. Your partner may even think it is amazing. But you know how much better this could be and what waste all of this is. So in the moment, you'll be angling toward that deeper connection you're used to achieving. If you pursue that anyway, your partner will detect that immediately and likely not respond in a positive way because that wasn't the kind of relationship the two of you had very indirectly agreed to. Either way, you will leave the experience feeling empty and disappointed.
 
So how does a person seeking a partner for a deeper connection manage to find a partner? 
•	Put it out in the universe what you're about and what you want. That doesn't mean waving your arms around in your bathrobe and wishing for some subtle energy current to deliver your wishes. It means either creating or finding a platform from which to actually communicate to people what your needs are. 
o	Remember that people will act as proxies IF YOU ASK THEM TO. Someone may know a person who would be perfect for you and know very well your situation and never connect the two until you ask (which provokes them to actually think about it. Remember 'normal' people don't think proactively; they must be prodded to do so.)
 
-- Addendum: Beyond monogamy
 
One thing that stands out about the connected relationship is that it is an intense bond between two people. This lends itself naturally to a monogamous relationship mode. The issues with monogamy are dealt with in another essay. To maintain a healthy relationship style, it's important for the connected couple to invite other people to play with them. But does that mean that the other person must also be engaged at the connected level?
 
The desire for connection is a deep-seated personal need that obviously not everyone has. However, once a person has established that connection, having superficial relations becomes possible. This is because a source for that connected experience has been established and the need sated. At that point, the playing field becomes leveled and it becomes possible, even desirable, to have superficial relations. This is the place of fetishes and fantasy fulfillment.
