Dating at 43
Thursday, September 3, 2020
4:18 AM
 
Is it possible for a 43-year-old single guy to find a relationship? 
 
Using myself as a reference point: I’m 42, divorced, don't have a mountain of cash in the bank, and I am 2 years into dating the one of the most beautiful and wonderful women I’ve ever known. It is a common trope that women become jaded after 40 and are just looking for a guy with money because they want to stop working and be taken care of. While this motivation is likely prevalent in a large number of cases, it isn't the only thing women are looking for and if you present a good enough case for the other aspects of a relationship, a reasonable woman will take a chance on you.
 
The reason my girlfriend chose to stay with me when she could have literally picked up the phone and called a guy who would have sent a helicopter to pick her up was that she realized that rich guys see women as property and treat them accordingly. The question wasn’t whether it was easier to be with a guy with money or without, but whether she wanted to sell herself as a sexual possession to a man she didn’t love or stay with a genuine person who honestly loves and cares for her. Also, it's worth noting that I possess very marketable skills and have a good paying job, so we aren't exactly living hand-to-mouth either.
 
But even that may be jumping too far ahead because you have to capture a woman's interest first before you can reach that stage. In my case, I was introduced to my girlfriend by my ex-wife, of all people. Regardless of who the person is, a recommendation from a trusted friend is your ticket to ride. For this reason, reputation is literally worth more than gold. It's vitally important that you treat people fairly and are known for being a decent and fair person.
 
If you’re a quality person with a good reputation and impeccable integrity, your friends will know. So they are your most valuable assets to finding a woman since they will vouch for you. And it's important that someone else vouch for you because women have become deaf to men bragging about themselves since they are almost always lying. But for a man to speak well of another man to a woman who, in theory, he could be trying to get for himself? That's something a woman will take note of. So ask your friends if they know of any single women around your age. If not, you may have to work on expanding your friend circle through their friends. And remember, you can and should be friends with women. But if you cross the line sexually with a female friend, she loses all value to you as a reference, and a female reference is worth 5 male references. Ex-wives are a notably more complicated case. But it is a powerful statement to have one vouch for your integrity. In fact, there can likely be no more effective reference than that.
 
Just to address the pink elephant in the room: forget about online dating. That’s for psychos, criminals, and whores. If you’re sincere about getting into a long-term relationship and all that entails, then put on a pair of pants and go out into the real world and meet people in person. That’s your only hope of finding a sincere like-minded person who is also looking for a long-term relationship with a quality human being.
 
Speaking of which, take some time to take a self-inventory, including feedback from people who know you just to reassure yourself that you are a quality human being. If you discover that you’ve got bats in the belfry, so to speak, get that situation taken care of before you drag some poor unsuspecting soul into your mountain of issues. Once you’re at a point where you’re happy being by yourself and don’t need another person to make you feel complete, but rather want another person to share your happiness and/or contentment with, then you have something of real value to offer that money can’t compete with.
 
In my case, I’ve spent the last 20 years getting my mental and emotional house in order through a combination of meditation and a few select quasi-religious practices. So I was well-positioned to have a relationship with an amazing woman when the opportunity presented itself. Of course, that doesn't mean that the women you date won't have all sorts of issues. But it's much easier to deal with just one person's issues than having to deal with both of you being off your rockers.
 
Last but certainly not least, the most valuable piece of advice I have is this: be rare. There are some qualities that a minority of women are looking for in a man and they absolutely will not compromise on. These can be anything from sharing her passion for music festivals to smoking crack. But for convenience I’ll use my own situation as an example: kinky sex.
 
My girl is a “queen in the streets, slut in sheets” type that most guys will say they want. However, if that’s true, it’s odd how few men can actually handle such a woman. Men suck at role playing, generally. They have this really dumb habit of letting what happens in the bedroom bleed over into normal life. As a woman, it’s exceedingly rare to find a man who has mastered this concept and is capable of treating her with respect after doing horrible things to her just 30 minutes earlier. Rare…
 
Figure out what makes you rare and lean on that as your calling card. No matter what it is, it will only appeal to a minority of women. But those who happen to be in that minority will fight over the opportunity to date you!
