Every Man Is An Island
Sunday, October 6, 2024
5:52 AM
 
 In May 2023, U.S. Surgeon General Vivek Murthy, M.D. called loneliness a public health epidemic. A poll conducted by the American Psychiatric Association earlier this year found that 1 in 3 Americans experienced feelings of loneliness on at least a weekly basis.
 
First, what is meant by the word loneliness? For the purposes of the poll mentioned previously, loneliness is "feeling like you do not have meaningful or close relationships or a sense of belonging."
 
The poll went on to ask about a couple of very relevant subjects:
 
1. "What role do you feel technology plays in forming relationships?"
66% of respondents indicated that technology “helps me form new relationships”, “helps me connect with others more frequently” (75%), and “is beneficial for forming and maintaining relationships” (69%). However, respondents were split on whether technology fosters “meaningful (54%)” or “superficial (46%)” relationships.
 
2. "What are some ways that you alleviate feelings of loneliness?"
50% find a distraction (like TV, podcasts, or social media)
41% go for a walk
38% reach out to friends or family
31% connect to a pet
31% exercise
26% eat more than usual
13% use drugs or alcohol
9% connect to a therapist or counselor
6% volunteer
 
Of course, self-reported findings are to be taken with a grain of salt. I don't believe for one minute that people are more likely to go for a walk than they are to reach out to friends. That doesn't even make sense. It's worth noting that women were 1.5 times more likely to say that they reach out to friends than men, so there may be some macho thing at play or perhaps men are just naturally more introverted.
 
But there is a segment of the population for which this is very good news. It's one that was sorely lacking in the poll options. The level of loneliness in society is directly proportional to the growth in cult membership. We tend to think of the word 'cult' as being derogatory. But this is really just propaganda from "legitimate" religious institutions who found a way to demonize the competition. This is supported by expose's secretly funded and/or supported by the major religions that seek to expose the dangerous nature of cults. It is for this reason that we know about cults like Heaven's Gate, The Branch Davidians, or Scientology.
 
But those types of examples comprise less than 0.1% of the total number of cults in existence. First of all, many cults are not even religious in nature. Many of them operate in the light of day without their members even being aware of being in a cult. For example, there are the long-standing cults that quite literally built this country: the Freemasons, Shriners, Rotary Club, 
 
 
 
 
 
Society as a whole is becoming increasingly lonely. It's because of the internet. The technology we thought would bring people together has only driven us apart. Before the internet, you had to reach out to people one-on-one. You either called them or went to their house. There was no way to broadcast a message or passively look in on their lives.
 
With the internet, we can keep up with the highlight reel of one another's lives and we can also maintain far more friendships due to the efficiency of scrolling and making broadcast updates. When we have that option, there is less of a motivation to spend all of that time driving to someone's place to talk one-on-one. If we want to do that, why not just video conference? It's so much more cost-efficient in terms of both time and money.
 
But something of value has been lost. Something of tremendous value. All relationships have become ephemeral because everyone is replaceable. We may consider ourselves "friends" fore years despite never meeting IRL. Then one fine day, I may learn that you intend to vote in the next election in a way I disagree with. <Unfriend>. Just like that. Poof. They're gone, usually without even the benefit of an explanation.
 
Why do they do that? Their investment in the friendship is so low that they aren't walking away from much. That's a perverse way to value a friendship, but it's a mindset ingrained by capitalism. A thing is only worth as much as you had to pay to acquire it. If we weren't all mentally ill, we would value friendships by the value we extract from them. If we thought more in terms of the overall value a person can add to our life, that would be a step in the right direction, at least. Of course, when your friendship is entirely online, the amount of value you can add is rather limited. The flavor of life comes in the form of shared experiences.
