FIGHT!
Saturday, January 16, 2021
7:10 AM
 
Q: Does it matter who started a quarrel?
 
A: For the most part, it doesn’t matter in the sense that you’re both going to lose. But it’s particularly irrelevant if the complaint is actually valid. But really, you shouldn’t have gotten into a quarrel to begin with. The only reason you did was because the initiator lacks emotional control and/or conflict resolution skills.
 
Side Note: Some other answers mentioned that you can simply choose to not engage as a way to avoid being involved in a quarrel. This is nonsense. In a relationship context, if your partner confronts you about something, real or imaginary, you’re involved no matter what you do. And choosing to not participate will be perceived as acting “holier than though” and usually enrage the other person more than any other possible response. So don’t even try that. Also, there is no way to win. As soon as someone starts voicing their pain, you’ve both lost. No matter what you do, the other person, if they’re a real a-hole, can bring it up later as a justification for why you’re a bad person (e.g. “You raised your voice to me!” or “You ignored me when I was trying to share my feelings with you!”). Like being arrested, anything you say can and will be used against you. Except in this case, saying nothing can also be used against you!
 
If, in a relationship, one person always starts the quarrels and they are consistently wrong, then that is an issue that needs to be addressed because it can quickly get to a point that it becomes abusive. It’s also a sign of immaturity and they should be embarrassed by it. It is very presumptive to begin venting emotions at another person if you aren’t 110% sure that your reasons for doing so are accurate and valid.
 
While quarrels are emotionally-motivated and emotions can’t be wrong exactly, they can be the result of wrong information. In that case, the person starting the quarrel can be wrong in 2 ways:
 
1.	They should have begun by calmly asking you to verify that the underlying facts or assumptions are true before launching into an emotional tirade.
2.	If you have previously discussed this issue and came to a resolution about how to avoid it in the future, then the instigator has failed to follow those instructions.
 
As you can see, the two are interrelated since the outcome of the first quarrel should be #1 and if you have another, then #2 applies. So really, the person who instigates a quarrel is always in the wrong because they should have kept their emotions in check and calmly verified their assumptions first. As long as you’re not a psycho and not trying to hurt your partner, their assumptions should always be wrong in some way that you can then correct and they have to process getting upset about nothing. If they lack that ability, then you’re dating a child and this becomes a whole different question about parenting.
