Is It Necessary To Have Rules In a Relationship?
Wednesday, February 26, 2025
6:17 PM
 
The most revered ritual that exists in our society regarding love and relationships is marriage. And what is the most iconic part of the marriage ritual? The laundry list of things you promise to do and/or not do which is supposed to serve as either a demonstration of your love or bring about peace of mind for your partner. But is any of that necessary?
 
Let's pick on the one commitment on that list that has by far been shown to be the most problematic: monogamy. Is it necessary to require your partner to explicitly offer you exclusive access to their body? Let's examine it from a few different angles:
 
1.	If a person is monogamous, that's just who they are. They are monogamous because they don't want to be otherwise. Think of how difficult it is to get someone to do something that they don't want to do. Short of a gun to the head, it's basically impossible. And in the unlikely gun-to-the-head scenario, would your partner be guilty of violating their promise to you if their ability to choose was forcibly removed? No, of course not. So what is accomplished by making them sign a contract where they declare that they will be themselves?
 
2.	If a person is not monogamous, what is accomplished by pressuring them to lie to you?
 
3.	If a person doesn't know who they are, are they competent to be making any life-long binding commitments?
 
The over-arching message is that people are going to do what they want to do. If you're dating me, there's no reason for you to make me promise to not eat olives because I never would. Sure, I could make that promise if it made you feel better. But doing so would not create a sense of being restricted within me because that's not something I have any desire to do whether I make a promise or not to that effect.
 
So, what can we deduce from this analysis? 
 
1.	All manner of promises, pacts, and any other form of behavioral agreements made between adults(1) is toxic and destructive. Therefore, you have one very specific, singular objective while you are dating someone. No, it's not to eliminating your gag reflex. Although, that's a noble secondary goal…
 
Your main goal is to find out who this person really is. Some people make this easy for you by being quite transparent. Others make you go on a hunt for it. Regardless, your role is purely passive information gathering. You will tell them that it's not your place to judge. But it totally is your place to judge... and judge you shall. But you won't let slip a single word of that judgement until it is time for you to make your formal ruling.
 
So if you find them awake at 2:00am on a Tuesday morning on their phone Googling for how to tie a noose, be a supportive partner and get them the rope and the instructions. However, do be mindful not to entrap your partner by encouraging them to do things they might not do otherwise. But do create an environment that encourages them to be their true self when the two of you are alone.
 
This is absolutely the most essential part of dating because if you get this right, you will be witnessing the person you might be spending the rest of your life with years in advance of when they might otherwise feel comfortable enough to stop self-censoring their behavior or pretending to be the person they think you want them to be. This saves precious time, and time is indeed precious!  
 
2.	Promises, pledges, and all other sorts of childish nonsense are not only unnecessary, but can only be destructive to a relationship because they pressure some people to feel as if their preferences are wrong simply because they aren't shared by the majority of people and this creates a sense of pressure to conform by agreeing to things you don't believe in or otherwise aren't what you want. 
 
3.	If you feel constrained by any relationship in your life, you have messed up. You have made a commitment that doesn't align with who you are and what you want in life. But you're a good person and your integrity matters to you, so you feel trapped. Stop doing this to yourself!
 
If that resonates with you, then the best course of action is to revise your commitment -before- you violate it. Tell whoever you made the problematic commitment to that you made it in error because you were young/stupid/pressured/gun-to-head/whatever. But you can offer a modified statement - not commitment, not promise, a statement - that describes who you are, what you want, and how you go about handling things regarding this subject. Your partner can accept it or they can dissolve the relationship. But either way, you'll feel 1000% better!
 
Footnotes:
 
1  If one of you is not adult - herein defined as a person who exhibits behaviors they do not wish to exhibit and needs to be controlled by another person because they are divided amongst themselves and thus incapable of regulating their behavior in a consistent way - then you're with a child2 regardless of what their driver's license says. Why are you dating a child? Stop that!
 
2 I would like to extend my sincerest apologies to children everywhere. There's no reason you should be lumped in with those people. It's just the most convenient literary device to get the point across.
