Keep On Rockin' In The First World!
2025
Severin Aequus
 
Here's a bite-sized morsel of knowledge for you. You know how people talk about countries being "first-world" or "third-world". Have you ever wondered if there are any "second-world" countries and what that might imply about them?
 
It turns out that there are second-world countries and the whole terminology doesn't mean at all what you think it means! The notion of countries belonging to 3 different "worlds" arose amidst the aftermath of World War 2. The definitions are as follows:
 
First-World - Allies: Countries aligned against the Nazis
 
Second-World - Axis: Countries aligned with the Nazis
 
Third-World - Countries that didn't formally join either the Axis or the Allies.
 
To put that into concrete terms, the exact nation membership is:
 
First-World: US, UK, Soviet Union, China, France, Poland, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, India, South Africa, Norway, Belgium, Netherlands, Greece, Yugoslavia, Luxemburg, Ethiopia, Brazil, Mexico, Philippines, Denmark, Thailand, Turkey, Iran, Columbia, and Cuba. 
 
Second-World: Germany, Italy, Japan, Hungary, Romania, Bulgaria, Slovakia, Croatia, India.[1], Thailand[2]
 
Third-World: Literally every country not listed above.
 
So when you think that being designated as a Third-World country means that the country is poor or has fallen behind the rest of the world in some way, I'll point out that Sweden is a Third-World country, as are Spain, Switzerland, Portugal, etc, etc.[3]

--------------------------
 
[1] As for those of you who are uncommonly perceptive and actually pay attention to details, I imagine you're rather confused about the inclusion of India on both the first and second-world lists. It isn't a type-o! Today, India is considered a first-world nation because it reversed its allegiance in 1941 before the end of the war. 
 
But why were they ever aligned with the Nazis? Because the enemy of my enemy is my friend (they're not, actually). Remember, when WW2 broke out, India was an occupied colony of Britain. Wanting to get out from under colonial rule, they sought to take advantage of the chaos created by the Nazis to get in their sucker punch to the UK while they were weakened. And their plan worked! This is why India is not part of the UK today.
 
Once they established their independence from Britain - and the drugs wore off - they quickly realized the fucked-up political position they were in and immediately switched teams! Their admission to the Allies was formalized prior to the official date of Nazi defeat, so they got the honor of being classed as a first-world nation.

--------------------------

[2] Thailand was officially aligned with the Axis powers through a military alliance with Imperial Japan during World War II, but it also maintained a powerful underground movement that secretly aided the Allies.

Official Axis Alignment
• Initial Neutrality: Thailand tried to remain neutral, but after a brief five-hour invasion by the Empire of Japan on December 8, 1941, the Thai government under Prime Minister Plaek Phibunsongkhram signed an armistice and a formal military alliance with Japan in December 1941.
• Declarations of War: Following pressure and Allied bombings, Thailand declared war on the United Kingdom and the United States in January 1942.
• Cooperation: Thailand allowed Japanese troops to pass through its territory to attack British territories, sent troops into Burma, and annexed select regional territories.

Secret Allied Assistance
• The Free Thai Movement: Known as Seri Thai, an underground resistance movement was organized inside Thailand and abroad by senior officials, including Regent Pridi Banomyong and the Thai ambassador to Washington.
• Double Game: While the official government cooperated with Japan, the Free Thai network supplied vital intelligence, sabotaged Japanese operations, and assisted Allied forces.
• Postwar Outcome: Because of the Free Thai Movement's contributions, the United States and other Allies treated Thailand as a coerced nation rather than a defeated enemy, allowing the country to avoid severe postwar penalties.

--------------------------

[3] Terminology evolved: These terms lost all meaning after World War 2 came to an end. But since they had bcome introduced into the popular lexicon, it didn't take long for them to be coopted to describe the reality of the post-WW2 world: The Cold War.

Under the Cold War framing, The First World became synonymous with the United States and its allies. The Second World consisted of the Soviet bloc countries. And just like before, the Third World was everyone else.

Once the Cold War was over, we were just so in love with these terms that we had to find a way to keep using them. So we again redefined the terms such that First World encompasses all "developed" nations. This definition seems to be intentionally vague enough that no concise list can be constructed. I argue that this is intentional so that the terms Third World can now be used merely as a pejorative to insult countries at a lesser stage of socioeconomic development. As for the Second World? What Second World? I don't see a Second World.
