Monogamy: Chill the Fuck Out
Monday, July 5, 2021
2:36 PM
 
Other Person: It's not the third party who broke up the marriage it's the person who permitted that person to come between them who is at fault.
 
Me: Perhaps. But the question must be asked about why the person was motivated to stray in the first place. Were they not getting a core emotional need met by their partner or did they just really have a basic horndog need to bed the girl down the block with the huge rack?
 
The difference matters a lot.
 
In the former case, the root cause of the issue is within the couple themselves and probably boils down to a communication breakdown on several fronts. You need to figure out how to be more self-aware when you aren't having your needs met and also be more communicative about this so that your partner has the opportunity to make it better. There is also likely work to be done in the area of listening so that when a serious concern is raised, it doesn't have to become a shouting match just so that the other party can feel heard.
 
In the latter, it's just monkey behavior... and we are indeed primates. While it may hurt your pride or even potentially introduce a health risk, those are things that just have to be mitigated through open communication.
 
People, in general, are waaay too uptight about pretty much everything. If you love someone and really want to be with them for the rest of your life, you can't suffocate them. If they are the type to get an itch for some strange every once in a while, sit down together and discuss it like adults. Then draft a sensible set of guidelines to ensure your safety and then let them get it out of their system (note that the guidelines will differ for each of you and this is not necessarily a double-standard).
 
It may not be fun or easy, but that's life in a long-term relationship with another monkey for ya. And no matter how much it may turn your stomach while you're waiting for him to return, it beats the hell out of the alternative: watching him gradually accumulating resentments about all of the fun you prevented and having the image of you in his mind become little more than a constant reminder of a misguided promise that he can't even remember why he made all those years ago. Instead, you become a saint and he goes to sleep every night knowing that he has the most awesome wife in the world.
 
Emotions can lead you astray. Think things through and trust in what your intellect tells you. Do this habitually and you will begin to be able to untrain many "automatic" responses you have to common situations. You will also learn not to react to things before your brain has a chance to think through them logically. Emotions are great things when they serve you. But when they don't, you have to put them in their place and not permit them to run your life for you. You're much too strong for that kind of BS.
