Perspectives on Sex Work
Thursday, December 13, 2018
2:54 PM
 
Sacha Mirage:
 
"More thoughts on sex work: I've dated a few sex workers and inevitably when the topic comes up within the first few days we're talking, they say something to the effect of, "I'm really not proud of this, but I used to be a stripper." Let me stop you right there. Sexuality is the force that caused us to evolve into what we are today. It's at the very core of our unconscious.
 
The repression of healthy sexual expression is the cause of serious psychological and social disease, and therefore I see sex work as a healing force in the world. Please stop being ashamed of what you do for a living or for what you used to do. I think you're a fucking hero, *especially* because you're doing it in the face of a society that persecutes sex workers, in addition to having some clients that are probably a bit toxic because of our sexual climate. I totally get if you can't be fully open about your career choice with your family or the public. But never, ever be ashamed of being a healer, because that's something to be proud of."
 
Me:
 
That is the idealized version of things. If everyone involved in sex work did it voluntarily, the reality would probably look a lot like that. Unfortunately, mounting economic pressures are forcing more and more people (mainly women, obviously) into sex work strictly because it's the only way they can make enough money to live. In those cases, the work is often traumatizing and results in emotional damage that can last a lifetime.
 
So before anyone flames me for being anti-sex-worker, I assure you I'm not. The problem is that we are witnessing the final days of this failed experiment in capitalism. It just happens that sex work ends up being the only leaking life raft available for young people to turn to for survival.
 
Another angle to consider is the role of sex work within a historical context. For most of the last 2,000 years or so, women were considered the property of their husbands. Even here in the US, women could not get a bank account under just their name until 1971! 
 
So sex work has historically been a way for women to rebel against the patriarchy and reject the idea of being someone else's property. In Renaissance Italy, women were not allowed to pursue formal education. The only women exempted form this rule were the courtesans. Naturally, this is because the men wanted to have stimulating conversation, not because it's the right thing to do.
 
For the last couple millennia in most of the Western world, sex work was the only way for women to lead a self-directed life. And that didn't formally end until sometime in the last few decades! But even now, with women not legally bound into submission, they still face considerable economic challenges being independent from men. So even today, sex work offers women a way to make enough money to break free of the economic shackles keeping them enslaved.
 
At this point, you may be tempted to praise sex work for making this possible. But that's like cutting off your head to cure a headache. The reality is that women are forced into doing something that may be very traumatic (depending on the individual) just for the possibility of living a life that all men are expected to have. See: wage discrimination.
