Boys are from Room 103, Girls are from Room 104
Thursday, July 7, 2022
3:31 AM
 
A bunch of you like to post either memes or diatribes (my preferred style of communication, obv) about the differences between men and women, almost always within the context of courtship. "Men need to stop doing ABC" or "Women need to spend more time spitting in my XYZ" or something more-or-less like that.
 
Completely ignoring the insufferable heteronormativity of it all, the core issue underlying your superficial complaints is not hard to see if you can just poke your heads up through the clouds of resentment long enough. And let's be real, if I can do it, so can you, ok?
 
Men hurt women and women hurt men. We both pretend to be strong around others and we both cry in private. It might have started small (or perhaps not, but just bear with me). The emotion that started this hellacious chain of events was most likely insecurity. But insecurity never travels alone; poetic, isn't it?
 
One fine day at recess, your mere presence caused some other 6-year-old to feel insecure. Maybe their insecurity was riding shotgun to envy or inadequacy or perhaps even jealousy (which is not the same as envy, btw). So they walked up to you with all of the fake toughness and self-assuredness they can muster and launched into a full-on assault of whatever thing you did or attribute you possessed that caused them to feel some way that was unpleasant to them. Having caught you completely off-guard and feeling that their case was air-tight and masterfully presented, they saunter off enjoying the relief of no longer being possessed of those unpleasant feelings.
 
As it happens, you were a young girl and the insecure person just happened to be a young boy. Despite the issue itself having nothing to do with sexuality, it is a difference that we take note of and that begins to create the us-versus-them mentality that we carry with us throughout the rest of our lives (unless we take conscious action to reprogram ourselves of it). 
 
So the little girl got her feelings hurt through a random act of aggression from a little boy. That's what is locked away in the girl's mind. Because that experience was unpleasant and because there was no identifiable provocation, the girl is left puzzled about what to do to avoid having such incidents recur. Thus, there is no other conclusion to be reached other than "boys are unstable" and/or "boys secretly hate girls and this rage can come to the surface at any moment even without provocation".
 
Girls soon discover that the only way they can "win" in any such encounter is to take a strong offensive position. The phrase "the best defense is a strong offense" is very appropriate here. Recognizing that boys' toughness is just an act, the girls realize that they can be hurt in much the same way that girls can. The trick is to get your punches in early or else you'll be stunned into inaction by the way that boys tend to dominate and control the interaction.
 
Some other fine day at recess another boy has an emotion, a pleasant one this time. He doesn't understand it, he just knows that it feels good to hang around close to you. So he does. Being now hypervigilant, this boy's movements and proximity to you do not escape your attention for a millisecond. But you pretend not to notice so that you don't appear paranoid in front of your friends. But now he's so close that you can literally feel his breath on the back of your neck. Surely his behavior has crossed the line of social acceptability and no one would fault you for reacting...
 
"Back off... C R E E P!"
 
The little boy bursts into tears and runs away, having experienced his very first rejection at the hands of a mean girl. To literally add insult to injury, he must cope with the weight of this new label that has just been applied to him and is now burning its way through the landscape of his young mind like hot lava.
 
Naturally, this completely unprovoked hostility must be reconciled in some way. Obviously, it requires uncommon skills and techniques to be able to approach girls without triggering their rage. 
 
Or perhaps not. Maybe there is no way to avoid triggering their rage because girls are inherently irrational. Might it be that the genders are so fundamentally different that the best that can be hoped for is merely isolated occurrences of well-understood interpersonal interactions governed by the laws of economics? Surely not... 
 
------------------
 
If you want to experience more effective communication with members of your preferred gender, talk directly to that 6-year-old boy or girl. Tell them you're sorry for hurting their feelings. Help them to see the members of your gender as sources of comfort and support rather than ridicule and judgment.
 
And most of all, be far gentler with one another. We're all hurting. More hurt isn't going to change anything. But love will. Goodnight all.



How To Sleep With a Woman The Night You Meet Her
Saturday, February 11, 2023
1:07 AM
 
1. Subtly indicate a desire for sex. Subtle = "How about we go somewhere more private to talk" NOT "nice dress, I'll bet it would look even better on the floor".
 
2. Actually listen to her and read her body language.
 
3. Sympathize rather than argue. Never become confrontational or even oppositional. 
 
4. Let her feel safe by empowering her. If she says, "I think we need to slow down", agree with her. Tell her that you can take things at the pace she's comfortable with and MEAN IT.
 
5. This is where the finesse comes in. You have to hold the "heat" at the current level and not push it forward nor let it die. Just hold it and allow her to adjust the gas as she sees fit. The only thing you want to communicate is a desire to be with her, but a fully constrained one. This relieves her concerns that you might do something stupid by demonstrating that you are in control of your emotions and not the other way around. It also engenders within her a curiosity to see what that desire looks like when it is no longer constrained. 
 
6. She's likely to test you with something like, "I have a rule that I don't sleep with anyone the same day I meet them". Just roll with it. Respond with something like, "That's probably wise". The test, of course, was to see if you would get upset and try to push her or even possibly grovel or some crap like that. So maintain your dignity, and as much as your dick may be screaming at you, play this like a game of poker and be honestly prepared to walk away because there is still a small chance that you may have to.
 
7. In my experience, this is where I notice that she has slipped under the sheets and is sliding her panties off. You've passed the test and the decision to move forward was squarely hers to make with no pressure from you. As an added bonus, full and enthusiastic consent is sort of built-in at this point, so there's no need to worry about that. 
 
The next-morning experience is always positive too because even in the case that she regrets it, she can't justifiably blame you for anything. Because all you've really done is just shown her basic human decency and respect for her own autonomy, you can go anywhere you like from here. I've had every type of scenario from this point from one-night stands all the way through marriage.
 
While this absolutely does work cold, it is of course going to be much more likely to succeed if you do some work ahead of time to shore up her confidence in you. These things include:
 
1. Have mutual friends who will speak well of you. This is even better if these friends are members of some kind of organized group that you are also a member of and invested in. This gives her an assurance of responsibility because you have given her an attack vector if she's displeased with your courtship prowess.
 
2. Have a shared interest that involves membership in some type of group, or be members of the same social circle, or be "famous" with some kind of formalized fanbase. These simply offer her a way to strike back at you if you do something fucked up to her. Just knowing that she has this in her back pocket will assuage her fears considerably.
 
3. Don't express interest when you first meet. Wait until after you've bumped into her a few times at events or parties to begin flirting with her. This tells her that you're a fixture in the local scene and are therefore not likely to disappear the next day. It also means that you've made some investment in being part of that scene which will make disappearing difficult and/or costly. Dovetailing in with #1, she gets some assurance that you can be held accountable if something... screwy... happens.
 
Lastly, and this one is just for you, have unimpeachable integrity. Be a man of principles, communicate what those principles are and demonstrate your allegiance to them through your actions. This will serve as your armor just in case the bitch is crazy and decides to try to come at you with false allegations for not doing whatever it is she wanted you to do.



The Wounded Angel
Sept. 11, 2026
6:30 AM

Interesting walk tonight. Just as I thought the walk was over, I spot this comically small black pleated skirt swaying in front of me. it was 2:20am at this point. All the bars are closed. There's no one else in eyesight. 

My brain instantly clocked an uncanny resemblance between this girl and the girl Natalie showed me in Unfinished Business (the final chapter of Liber Umbrae where I channel her spirit) when she intentionally mishears "Pleiades" as "pleats". So, one could start to think that perhaps Natalie somehow caused this encounter. 

However, to do so, one would be ignoring the stark fact that there are approximately 40,000 girls in tiny pleated skirts on 6th Street on any given night. Ergo, the raw probability falls strongly in favor of coincidence.

So, I catch up to her with a relatively self-aware, "Nevermind the weird guy creeping up on you in the middle of the night." 

She maintained her pace, looked me in the eyes and said, "You didn't scare me..."

A+ response.

I look her up and down and she was an alt girl. Not what I was expecting given the view. But I'm not complaining either.

"How was your evening?"

"Uneventful. You?"

"I used the flashlight on my phone to assist a random shirtless twink find his keys in the grass."

"Did he find them?"

"No. He remembered that he didn't own a car!"

Being one to rapidly dispense with small talk, I pivoted with, "Which kind of weirdo are you?"

She replied, "I don't know, but I'm definitely a weirdo."

...we have achieved full engagement!

"I just got broken up with a week ago. It's really been difficult."

OK, this can't possibly get any easier...

So we exchanged names. Hers may or may not be Clarissa. 

She's bartender, which explains a lot about the lack of fear and 2:20am sobriety.

She continued. "What kind of weirdo are you?"

I replied, "I'm an author."

"Author of what?"

"Occult books."

"What are they about?"

"The first one is about how to be a good person. The second is about how to perceive reality as it truly is."

She gets visibly excited by this.

"That's exactly what I need right now!"

This couldn't be made simpler if I'd written this interaction myself!

She's on her way to an afterhours club to meet her gay best friend Max. She asks if I have plans. Why, no, I happen to be available.

Max is waiting for us at the next intersection.

So, all three of us go to this club. They're doing pat-downs at the door. I had a small folding knife on me. I observe the pat down procedure and slip the knife into my sock when they aren't looking. 

Mental Note: Remember to tell headquarters that I have breached the perimeter!

...and then there's a $20 cover charge.

"Well, that was fun... I'll just be off."

Max comes in with, "No, man, I got you. If Clarissa says you're cool I'll cover you."

We go to the illegal cash bar. My broke ass is looking awkward. Max asks what I want. He reiterates that he's got me. 

Just as a reminder, I just met this guy 10 minutes prior!

Then an interesting thing happens. He pays for my drink and she pays for hers and his. OK... apparently, there's some kind of underground economic etiquette that no one told me about.

So now we're in a fucking club environment. Not ideal.

We wander. There's a karaoke room because of course there is. Things have just gotten awkward. I'm stone sober with half a beer in my hand. I am not equipped for karaoke.

We located a bench to sit on and observe the drunken revelry. Clarissa finds an excuse to sit very close to me.

I revealed that I've authored more than 100 essays on the subject of relationships and dating.

"So you're a pick-up artist?"

ROFL

"Hardly. But it's interesting that you mention that because I do write some essays intended to appeal to that crowd only to bait-and-switch them with a guide to ethical behavior, agency, and consent." (reference: "How To Sleep With a Woman The Night You Meet Her") 

I continued, "The truly fascinating thing is that my techniques are not only ethical, they have also been proven to be highly effective at attracting women! The point, of course, is that there is no need for games in order for humans to get what they want from one another. But I also have a whole long thing examining why they do anyway." (reference: "Boys are from Room 103; Girls are from Room 104")

Then, we pivoted sharply to the story about the Austin Vampire Court being founded in my kitchen and how I hosted all their parties for 4 years. 

Then she asks me, "You mean like REAL vampires?"

OK. So she's not an intellectual titan. But it's truly unnerving the number of times I have had to remind people that vampires don't physically exist. 

This led up to the story of the time MTV showed up at my house to film an episode of True Life. (reference: MTV True Life: "I Want Respect For My Sect")

"I'm going to check that out."

"It may be difficult because of how MTV is about their media. But I can send the video to you."

This was me being both totally honest and also being slick about getting her contact details. She oddly was not forthcoming though.

So we continue on bantering like this for about 30 minutes, then she starts obsessively checking her phone. She just occasionally looks up with an "I'm sorry." expression. The person texting her was her ex, obviously, whom she felt compelled to respond to.

This goes on for like an hour. Then she suddenly jumped up and bolted out the door. She gave me zero signal to pursue. 

About a minute later, Max asked me where she went. I said that her ex has been texting her. He replied, "She's really going through it." Then, he left. I gave him 5 minutes to make a clean break. Then, I left.

She and I exchanged names, but I didn't get her number.

All in all, it was a far more entertaining evening than expected. As per protocol, my expectations were calibrated precisely at zero. Therefore, the evening exceeded my expectations. So we'll call it a win!

------------------

Hindsight:

1. Max was likely motivated to cover me for a couple of reasons:
a. Clarissa had indicated to him nonverbally that I passed the vibe check of a Sixth Street bartender.
b. He observed that Clarissa seemed happy around me and he cares about her and wanted to see that continue.

2. Selecting "Lucid Dreams" by Juice WRLD for karaoke might have been strong enough to change the outcome of the evening... especially if she saw the tears roll down my cheek as I clumsily attempted to sing it. (Because the song is about a breakup with a girl with BPD which ties it back to Natalie). However, at that time, I believed the evening to be going extremely well and was in a simple "just don't fuck this up" mindset . I had no way to know that the ghost of penis past would enter the chat (literally) only minutes later.

3. The story is structurally recursive.
The story of Clarissa almost perfectly mirrored the story about helping the guy find keys to a car that didn't exist. Here's how the symbolism maps:
guy -> Clarissa
flashlight -> Author of how to see truth
keys -> emotions
car -> old relationship
search -> escape

------------------

The previous section is a work of nonfiction. All of that ocurred. The following is purely a hypothetical scenario intended to demonstrate the resolution proposed in Room 103/104 applied to this scenario.

The next day, I went for my nightly walk as usual. And sure enough, there she was. We locked eyes momentarily and I could see an expression of fear on her face as she turned to run. Being only a few feet away, I quickly caught her. Yes, I physically restrained her momentarily. She looked at me with a more intense expression of fear and I just smiled at her and said, "You don't owe me anything." <pause> "How are you doing?" 

She ran because she had been conditioned by other men that when she exercises her agency in a way that causes a disappointing result, men will become angry and perhaps even try to exact revenge. So, she ran not out of embarrassment or because she felt like she even had anything to apologize for. She ran because her script tells her, "I just poked a bear." 

Physically restraining her was a risky move because it assumes that my premise is correct. While it was impossible to know that with certainty, all interpersonal interactions are matters of statistics and the statistical weights were HEAVILY in favor of my interpretation. But even so, does that justify physical intervention? Yes, for two reasons:

1. The purpose of the intervention was to both benefit her and to diffuse the perceived need to flee.
2. I had her for 3 seconds just to say the critical sentence and then she was free to go.

This is also not a case of "man exerts physical dominance of woman" either. This scenario can and does happen in reverse.

The key takeway though is that when I said "You don't owe me anything" that was the moment I spoke to her inner wounded 6-year-old and healed the damage from the playground all those years ago. 